

<!-- usepackage latexsym  -->

<!-- begin document -->
# Improving Finite-State Spell-Checker Suggestions with  Part of Speech N-Grams¹ 

<span style='font-size:8pt'>(¹ Authors' archival version: Originally published in CICLING 2012 in Delhi <http://cicling.org/2012/>.)</span>

**Authors:** Tommi A Pirinen 
and

Miikka Silfverberg 
and

Krister Lind\’{en

University of Helsinki

Department of Modern Languages

University of Helsinki, 00014

tommi.pirinen,miikka.silfverberg,krister.linden@helsinki.fi}

**Date:** Last Modification: (date of conversion: 2025-12-31)

<!-- make title -->


**Abstract:** 
In this paper we demonstrate a finite-state implementation of
context-aware spell checking utilizing an N-gram based part of speech (POS)
tagger to rerank the suggestions from a simple edit-distance based
spell-checker. We demonstrate the benefits of context-aware spell-checking for
English and Finnish and introduce modifications that are necessary to make
traditional N-gram models work for morphologically more complex languages, such
as Finnish.
<!-- end abstract -->

## Introduction

Spell-checking by computer is perhaps one of the oldest and most researched
applications in the field of language technology starting from the mid 20th
century [(cites: damerau/1964)](#damerau/1964). One of the crucial parts of spell-checking—both
from an interactive user-interface point of view and for unsupervised correction
of errors—is the production of spelling suggestions.  In this article we test
various finite-state methods for using context and shallow morphological
analysis to improve the suggestions generated by traditional edit distance
measures or unigram frequencies such as simple weighted
finite-state dictionaries trained from word form frequencies as 
in [(cites: pirinen/2010/lrec)](#pirinen/2010/lrec).

The spell-checking task can be split into two parts, i.e. *detection* and
actual *correction* of the spelling errors. The spelling errors can be
detected in text as word forms that are unlikely to belong to the
natural language in question, such as writing ‘cta’ instead of ‘cat’. This form
of spelling errors is commonly called *non-word (spelling) errors*.
Another form of spelling errors is word forms that do not belong to the given
context under certain syntactic or semantic requirements, such as writing
‘their’ instead of ‘there’. This form is correspondingly called *real-word
(spelling) errors*. The non-word type of spelling errors can easily be detected
using a dictionary, whereas the detection of the latter type of errors typically
requires syntactic analysis or probabilistic methods [(cites: mitton/2009)](#mitton/2009). For
the purpose of this article we do not distinguish between them, as the same
correction methods can be applied to both.

The correction of spelling errors usually means generating a list of word forms
belonging to the language for a user to chose from. The mechanism for
generating correction suggestions for the erroneous word-forms is an
*error-model*. The purpose of an error-model is to act as a filter to
revert the mistakes the user typing the erroneous word-form has made.  The
simplest and most traditional model for making such corrections is the
Levenshtein-Damerau edit distance algorithm, attributed initially to
[(cites: levenshtein/1966)](#levenshtein/1966) and especially in the context of spell-checking to
[(cites: damerau/1964)](#damerau/1964). The Levenshtein-Damerau edit distance assumes that
spelling errors are one of insertion, deletion or changing of a single
character to another, or swapping two adjacent characters, which models well
the spelling errors caused by an accidental slip of finger on a keyboard. It
was originally discovered that for most languages and spelling errors, this
simple method already covers 80 % of all spelling errors [(cites: damerau/1964)](#damerau/1964).
This model is also language-independent, ignoring the differences in character
repertoires of a given language. Various other error models have also been
developed, ranging from confusion sets to phonemic folding [(cites: kukich/1992)](#kukich/1992).

In this paper, we evaluate the use of context for further fine-tuning of the
correction suggestions. The context is still not commonly used in
spell-checkers. According to [(cites: kukich/1992)](#kukich/1992) it was lacking in the majority
of spell-checkers and while the situation may have improved slightly for some
commercial office suite products, the main spell-checkers for open source
environments are still primarily context-ignorant, such as
hunspell (footnote: <http://hunspell.sf.net>) which is widely used in the
open source world.  For English, the surface word-form trigrams model has been
demonstrated to be reasonably efficient both for non-word cases
[(cites: church/1991)](#church/1991) and for for real-word cases[(cites: mays/1991)](#mays/1991). As an
additional way to improve the set of suggestions, we propose to use
morphosyntactically relevant analyses in context. In this article, we evaluate
a model with a statistical morphological tagger [(cites: silfverberg/2011)](#silfverberg/2011).  The
resulting system is in effect similar as described in [(cites: otero/2007)](#otero/2007) for
Spanish (footnote: We are grateful for the anonymous reviewer on bringing this
previous work on same methods and similar systems to our knowledge.)

The system described is fully built on freely available tools and data,
available for download and use from 
<http://hfst.svn.sourceforge.net/viewvc/hfst/trunk/cicling-2011-contextspell/>.
The only exception to this is the training data for Finnish, since there is no
available morphological training data for Finnish as of yet, the download does
not contain the source material for training but only the trigram models
compiled into binary format automata.

Furthermore, we test the context-based spelling methods using both English and
Finnish language materials to ensure the applicability of the method for
morphologically different languages. The reason for doing this is two-fold;
firstly the fact that English has rather low morphological productivity may
make it behave statistically differently from other languages. On the other
hand, English has the largest amount of freely available text corpora. For
other languages, the availability of free corpora, especially annotated
material, is often seen as a problem.

The article is laid out as follows: In Section [(see: sec:methods)](#sec:methods), we outline
the implementation of a finite-state context-aware spell-checker and describe
the statistical methods used.  In Section [(see: sec:material)](#sec:material), we introduce the
corpora and dictionaries used for spell-checking and training material as well
as the corpora used for obtaining the spelling errors with context. In
Section [(see: sec:evaluation)](#sec:evaluation), we show how the created spelling correctors
improve the results and explain the errors left. In
Section [(see: sec:future-work)](#sec:future-work), we compare our work with other current systems
and enumerate possible improvements for both.

## Methods
<a id="sec:methods">(¶ sec:methods)</a>

The spelling correction in this article is performed in several phases:
assuming misspelled word *cta* for *cat*, we first apply the error
model to the already known incorrect string *cta* to produce candidates
for probable mistypings. For this purpose we use the Damerau-Levenshtein
edit-distance algorithm in finite-state form. When applied to *cta* we get
all strings with one or two typing mistakes, i.e. *ata*, *bta*,
..., *acta*, *bcta*, ..., *ta*, *ca*, ...,
*tca*, and the correct *cat*. This set of strings is simultaneously
matched against the language model, which will produce a set of corrections,
such as *cat*, *act* or *car*. Since both the error-model and
the language model contain information on likelihoods of errors and words
respectively, the resulting list will be sorted according to a combination of
the edit distance measure and the probability of the word in a reference
corpus.  The rankings based on edit distance alone and the edit distance
combined with word probabilities form our two baseline models. 

The context-based models we introduce here use the suggestion list gained from
a contextless spelling-checker and the context of the words as input to rerank
suggestions based on N-gram models. Each of the suggestions is tried against
the N-gram models, and the ones with higher likelihoods will be lifted.  For
example when correcting the misspelling of ‘an’ as ‘anx’ in the sentence “this
is anx example sentence”, as shown in the Table [(see: fig:example)](#fig:example), we have the
surface trigrams \{this, is, \_\}, \{is, \_, example\}, \{\_, example,
sentence\}, and corresponding analysis trigrams \{DET, VVBZ, \_\}, \{VVBZ, \_,
NN\}, \{\_, NN, NN\}. The suggestions for anx at edit distance one include
‘ax’, ‘an’ (one deletion), ‘ant’, ‘and’, ‘any’ (one change) and so on. To rank
the possible suggestions, we substitute <span class='math'>s_3</span> with the suggestions, and
calculate the likelihood of their analyses. 


**Table:**
(Caption: Example trigram combinations<a id="fig:example">(¶ fig:example)</a>)
<div style='text-align: center'>


| ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- |
| this<span class='math'>_{s_1}</span>  |  is<span class='math'>_{s_2}</span>  |  \_<span class='math'>_{s_3}</span>  |  example<span class='math'>_{s_4}</span>  |  sentence<span class='math'>_{s_5}</span>|
| DET<span class='math'>_{a_1}</span>  |  VVBZ<span class='math'>_{a_2}</span>  |  \_ <span class='math'>_{a_3}</span> |  NN<span class='math'>_{a_4}</span>  |  NN<span class='math'>_{a_5}</span>|

</div>
<!-- end table -->

### Weighted Finite-State Interpretation of the Method

In this article we use a finite-state formulation of
spell-checking. We assume the standard notation for finite-state
algebra and define the language model as a weighted finite-state
automaton assigning a weight to each correctly spelled word-form of a
language, and an error model automaton mapping a misspelled string to
a set of corrected strings and their weights. The probabilistic
interpretation of the components is such that the weighted fsa as a
language model assigns weight <span class='math'>w(s)</span> to word <span class='math'>s</span> corresponding to the
probability <span class='math'>P(s)</span> for the word to be a correct word in the
language. The error model assigns weight <span class='math'>w(s:r)</span> to string pair <span class='math'>s,
r</span> corresponding to the probability <span class='math'>P(s|r)</span> of a user writing word r
when intending to write the word <span class='math'>s</span>, and the context model assigns
weight <span class='math'>w(s_3 a_3)</span> to word <span class='math'>s_3</span> with associated POS tagging <span class='math'>a_3</span>
corresponding to the standard HMM estimate <span class='math'>P(a_3 s_3)</span> of the analysis being in
a 3-gram context given by equation ([(see: trigram-prob)](#trigram-prob)).
<div class='math'><a id="trigram-prob">(¶ trigram-prob)</a>
P(a_3 s_3) = \prod_{i=3}^{5}P(s_i|a_i)P(a_i|a_{i-2}, a_{i-1})
</div>


In a weighted finite-state system, the probabilistic data needs to be converted
to the algebra supported by the finite-state weight structure.  In this case we
use the tropical semi-ring by transforming the frequencies into penalty weights
with the formula <span class='math'>-\log\frac{f}{CS}</span>, where <span class='math'>f</span> is the frequency and <span class='math'>CS</span> the
corpus size in number of tokens. If the language model allows for words that
are not in the dictionary, a maximal weight is assigned to the unseen word
forms that may be in the language model but not in the training corpus, i.e.
any unseen word has a penalty weight of <span class='math'>-\log\frac{1}{CS}</span>.

The spelling corrections suggested by these unigram lexicon-based
spell-checkers are initially generated by composing an edit-distance
automaton [(cites: agata/2002)](#agata/2002) with an error weight corresponding to the
probability of the error estimated in a corpus, i.e. <span class='math'>-\log\frac{f_{F}}{CS+1}</span>,
where <span class='math'>f_F</span> is the frequency of the misspelling in a corpus. This weight is
attached to the edit distance type error. In practice, this typically still
means that the corrections are initially ordered primarily by the edit distance
of the correction, and secondarily by the unigram frequency of the word-form in
the reference corpus.  This order is implicitly encoded in the weighted paths
of the resulting automaton; to list the corrections we use the n-best paths
algorithm [(cites: mohri/2002)](#mohri/2002). This ordering is also used as our second baseline.

For a context-based reordering of the corrections, we use the POS tagging
probabilities for the given suggestions. The implementation of the analysis
N-gram probability estimation is similar to the one described in
[(cites: silfverberg/2011)](#silfverberg/2011) with the following adaptations for the spelling
correction. For the suggestion which gives the highest ranking, the most likely
analysis is selected.  The N-gram probability is estimated separately for each
spelling suggestion and then combined with the baseline probability given by
the unigram probability and the edit distance weight. The ideal scaling for the
weights of unigram probabilities, i.e.  edit distance probabilities with
respect to N-gram probabilities, can be acquired by e.g.g tuning the scaling
parameter on an automatically generated spelling error corpus.


The resulting finite-state system consists of three sets of automata, i.e. the
dictionary for spell-checking, the error-model as described in
[(cites: pirinen/2010/lrec)](#pirinen/2010/lrec), and the new N-gram model automata. The automata sizes
are given in Table [(see: table:sizes)](#table:sizes) for reference. The sizes also give an
estimate of the memory usage of the spell-checking system, although the actual
memory-usage during correction will rise depending on the actual extent of the
search space during the correction phase.


**Table:**
(Caption: Automata sizes<a id="table:sizes">(¶ table:sizes)</a>.)
<div style='text-align: center'>


| Automaton  |  States  |  Transitions  |  Bytes |
| ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- |
| <!-- FIXME: multicolumn 4 c -->{**English**} |
| Dictionary  |  25,330  |  42,448  |  1.2 MiB |
| Error model  |  1,303  |  492,232  |  5.9 MiB |
| N-gram lexicon  |  363,053  |  1,253,315  |  42 MiB |
| N-gram sequences  |  46,517  |  200,168  |  4.2 MiB |
| <!-- FIXME: multicolumn 4 c -->{**Finnish**} |
| Dictionary  |  179,035  |  395,032  |  16 MiB |
| Error model  |  1,863  |  983,227  |  12 MiB |
| N-gram lexicon  |  70,665  |  263,298  |  8.0 MiB |
| N-gram sequences  |  3,325  |  22,418  |  430 KiB |

</div>
<!-- end table -->

### English-Specific Finite-State Weighting Methods

The language model for English was created as described in
[(cites: norvig/2010)](#norvig/2010) (footnote: The finite-state formulation of this is informally
described in
<http://blogs.helsinki.fi/tapirine/2011/07/21/how-to-write-an-hfst-spelling-corrector/>).
It consists of the word-forms and their  probabilities in the corpora. The edit
distance is composed of the standard English alphabet with an estimated error
likelihood of 1 in 1000 words.  Similarly for the English N-gram material, the
initial analyses found in the WSJ corpus were used in the finite-state tagger
as such. The scaling factor between the dictionary probability model and the
edit distance model was acquired by estimating the optimal multipliers using
the automatic misspellings and corrections of a Project Gutenberg
Ebook (footnote: <http://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/11/pg11.txt>)
*Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland*. In here the estimation simply means
trying out factors until results are stable and picking the best one.

### Finnish-Specific Finite-State Weighting Methods

The Finnish language model was based on a readily-available morphological
weighted analyser of Finnish language [(cites: pirinen/2011/nodalida)](#pirinen/2011/nodalida).  We further
modified the automaton to penalize suggestions with newly created compounds and
derivations by adding a weight greater than the maximum to such suggestions,
i.e. <span class='math'>-A\log\frac{1}{CS+1}</span>, where <span class='math'>A</span> is the scaling factor acquired from the
training material. This has nearly the same effect as using a separate
dictionary for suggestions that excludes the heavily weighted forms without
requiring the extra space.  Also for Finnish, a scaling factor was estimated by
using automatic misspellings and corrections of a Project Gutenberg
Ebook (footnote: <http://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/10863/pg10863.txt>)
*Juha*.

In the initial Finnish tagger, there was a relatively large tagset, all of
which did not contain information necessary for the task of
spell-checking, such as discourse particles, which are relatively
context-agnostic [(cites: visk)](#visk), so we opted to simplify the tagging in these
cases. Furthermore, the tagger used for training produced heuristic readings for
unrecognized word-forms, which we also removed. Finally, we needed to add
some extra penalties to the word forms unknown to the dictionary in the 
N-gram model, since this phenomenon was more frequent and diverse for Finnish
than English. The extra penalties were acquired by iterative testing on the
correction material using generated errors.


## Material
<a id="sec:material">(¶ sec:material)</a>

To train the spell-checker lexicons, word-form probabilities can be acquired
from arbitrary running text. By using unigram frequencies, we can assign
all word-forms some initial probabilities in isolation, i.e. with no spell-checking context.
The unigram-trained models we used were acquired from existing 
spell-checker systems [(cites: norvig/2010,pirinen/2010/lrec)](#norvig/2010,pirinen/2010/lrec), but we briefly
describe the used corpora here as well.

To train the various N-gram models, corpora are required. For the surface-form
training material, it is sufficient to capture running N-grams in the text.
For training the statistical tagger with annotations, we also require 
disambiguated readings. Ideally of course this means hand-annotated
tree banks or similar gold standard corpora. 


The corpora used are summarized in Table [(see: table:corpora)](#table:corpora). The sizes are
provided to make it possible to reconstruct the systems. In practice, they are the newest
available versions of the respective corpora at the time of testing. In the
table, the first row is the training material used for the finite-state
lexicon, i.e. the extracted surface word-forms without the analyses for unigram
training. The second row is for the analyzed and disambiguated material for the
N-gram based taggers for suggestion improvement. The third line is the corpora
of spelling errors used only for the evaluation of the systems.  As we can see
from the figures of English compared with Finnish, there is a significant
difference in freely available corpora such as Wikipedia. When going further to
lesser resourced languages, the number will drop enough to make such statistical
approaches less useful, e.g. Northern S\’{a}mi in [(cites: pirinen/2010/lrec)](#pirinen/2010/lrec).



**Table:**
(Caption: Sizes of training and evaluation corpora.
    <a id="table:corpora">(¶ table:corpora)</a>)
  <div style='text-align: center'>


| ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- |
|  |  Sentences  |  Tokens  |  Word-forms |
| <!-- FIXME: multicolumn 4 c -->{**English**} |
| Unigrams  |    |  2,110,728,338  |  128,457  |
| N-grams  |  42,164  |  969,905  |  39,690 |
| Errors   |  85  |  606  |  217 |
| <!-- FIXME: multicolumn 4 c -->{**Finnish**} |
| Unigrams  |    |  17,479,297  |  968,996 |
| N-grams  |  98,699  |  1,027,514  |  144,658 |
| Errors   |  333  |  4,177  |  2,762 |

  </div>
<!-- end table -->

### English corpora

The English dictionary is based on a frequency weighted word-form list of
the English language as proposed in [(cites: norvig/2010)](#norvig/2010). The word-forms were
collected from the English Wiktionary (footnote: <http://en.wiktionary.org>),
the English EBooks from the project
Gutenberg (footnote: <http://www.gutenberg.org/browse/languages/en>) and the
British National
Corpus (footnote: <http://www.kilgarriff.co.uk/bnc-readme.html>). This
frequency weighted word-list is in effect used as a unigram lexicon for spell-checking.

To train an English morphosyntactic tagger, we use the WSJ corpus. In
this corpus each word is annotated by a single tag that encodes some
morphosyntactic information, such as part-of-speech and inflectional
form.  The total number of tags in this corpus is <span class='math'>77</span>.

The spelling errors of English were acquired by extracting the ones with
context from the Birkbeck error
corpus (footnote: <http://ota.oucs.ox.ac.uk/headers/0643.xml>). In this
corpus, the errors are from a variety of sources, including errors made by
children and language-learners. For the purpose of this experiment we picked
the subset of errors which had context and also removed the cases of word
joining and splitting to simplify the implementation of parsing and suggestion.
When interpreting results it should be noted that many of these English errors
are competence errors while the baseline algorithm used to model errors here is
for typing errors.

### Finnish Corpora

As the Finnish dictionary, we selected the freely available open source
finite-state implementation of a Finnish morphological
analyser (footnote: <http://home.gna.org/omorfi>). The analyser had the
frequency-weighted word-form list based on Finnish
Wikipedia (footnote: <http://download.wikipedia.org/fiwiki/>) making it in
practice an extended unigram lexicon for Finnish. The Finnish morphological
analyser, however, is capable of infinite compounding and derivation, which
makes it a notably different approach to spell checking than the English finite
word-form list. 

The Finnish morphosyntactic N-gram model was trained using a
morphosyntactically analyzed Finnish
Newspaper (footnote: <http://www.csc.fi/english/research/software/ftc>). In
this format, the annotation is based on a sequence of tags, encoding
part of speech and inflectional form. The total number of different
tag sequences for this annotation is 747.

For Finnish spelling errors, we ran the Finnish unigram spell-checker through
Wikipedia, europarl and a corpus of Finnish EBooks from the project
Gutenberg (footnote: <http://www.gutenberg.org/browse/languages/fi>) to
acquire the non-word spelling errors, and picked at random the errors having
frequencies in range 1 to 8 instances; a majority of higher frequency non-words
were actually proper nouns or neologisms missing from the dictionary. Using all of
Wikipedia, europarl and Gutenberg provides a reasonable variety of both
contemporary and old texts in a wide range of styles.



## Tests and Evaluation
<a id="sec:evaluation">(¶ sec:evaluation)</a>

The evaluation of the correction suggestion quality is described in
Table [(see: table:real-eval)](#table:real-eval). The Table [(see: table:real-eval)](#table:real-eval) contains the
precision for the spelling errors. The precision is measured by ranked
suggestions. In the tables, we give the results separately for ranks 1—5, and
then for the accumulated ranks 1—10.  The  rows of the table represent
different combinations of the N-gram models. The first row is a baseline score
achieved by the weighted edit distance model alone, and the second is with
unigram-weighted dictionary over edit-distance 2. The last two columns are the
traditional word-form N-gram model and our POS tagger based extension to it.


**Table:**
(Caption: Precision of suggestion algorithms with real spelling errors.
    <a id="table:real-eval">(¶ table:real-eval)</a>)
  <div style='text-align: center'>


| ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- |
| Algorithm  |  1  |  2  |  3  |  4  |  5  |  1—10 |
| <!-- FIXME: multicolumn 7 c -->{**English**} |
Edit distance 2 (baseline) 
|  |  25.9 %  |  2.4 %  |  2.4 %  |  1.2 %  |  3.5 %  |  94.1 % |
Edit distance 2 with Unigrams 
|  |  28.2 %  |  5.9 %  |  29.4 %  |  3.5%  |  28.2 %  |  97.6 % |
Edit distance 2 with Word N-grams 
|  |  29.4 %  |  10.6 %  |  34.1 %  |  5.9 %  |  14.1 %  |  97.7 % |
Edit distance 2 with POS N-grams 
|  |  68.2 %  |  18.8 %  |  3.5 %  |  2.4 %  |  0.0 %  |  92.9 % |
| <!-- FIXME: multicolumn 7 c -->{**Finnish**} |
Edit distance 2 (baseline)
|  |  66.5 %  |  8.7 %  |  4.0 %  |  4.7 %  |  1.9 %  |  89.8 % |
Edit distance 2 with Unigrams 
|  |  61.2 %  |  13.4 %  |  1.6 %  |  3.1 %  |  3.4 %  |  88.2 % |
Edit distance 2 with Word N-grams
|  |  65.0 %  |  14.4 %  |  3.8 %  |  3.1 %  |  2.2 %  |  90.6 % |
Edit distance 2 with POS N-grams
|  |  71.4 %  |  9.3 %  |  1.2 %  |  3.4 %  |  0.3 %  |  85.7 % |

  </div>
<!-- end table* -->


It would appear that POS N-grams will in both cases give a significant boost to
the results, whereas the word-form N-grams will merely give a slight increase to
the results. In the next subsections we further dissect the specific changes to
results the different approaches give.

### English Error-Analysis

In [(cites: norvig/2010)](#norvig/2010), the authors identify errors that are not solved using
simple unigram weights, such as correcting *rember* to *remember*
instead of *member*. Here, our scaled POS N-gram context-model as well
as the simpler word N-gram model, which can bypass the
edit distance model weight will select the correct suggestion. However, when
correcting e.g.  *ment* to *meant* in stead of *went* or
*met* the POS based context reranking gives no help as the POS stays the
same.

### Finnish Error-Analysis

In Finnish results we can easily notice that variation within the first
position in the baseline results and reference system is more sporadic. This
can be traced back to the fuzz factor caused by a majority of probabilities
falling into the same category in our tests. The same edit-distance and unigram
probability leaves the decision to random factors irrelevant to this
experiment, such as alphabetical ordering that comes from data structures
backing up the program code. The N-gram based reorderings are the only methods
that can tiebreak the results here.

An obvious improvement for Finnish with POS N-grams comes from correcting
agreeing NP’s towards case agreement, such as *yhdistetstä* to
*yhdisteistä* (‘of compounds’ <span style='font-variant: small-caps'>Pl Ela</span>) instead of the statistically
more common *yhdisteestä* (‘of compound’ <span style='font-variant: small-caps'>Sg Ela</span>). However, as
with English, the POS information does fail to rerank cases where two equally
rare word-forms with the same POS occur at the same edit distance, which seems
to be common with participles, such as correcting *varustunut* to
*varautunut* in stead of *varastanut*.

Furthermore we note that the the discourse particles that were dropped from the
POS tagger’s analysis tag set in order to decrease the tag set size will cause
certain word forms in the dictionary to be incorrectly reranked, such as when
correcting the very common misspelling *muillekkin* into
*muillekokin* (‘for others as well?’ <span style='font-variant: small-caps'>Pl All Qst Kin</span>) instead of
the originally correct *muillekin* (‘for others as well’ <span style='font-variant: small-caps'>Pl All
Kin</span>), since the analyses <span style='font-variant: small-caps'>Qst</span> (for question enclitic) and <span style='font-variant: small-caps'>Kin</span>
(for additive enclitic) are both dropped from the POS analyses.

### Performance Evaluation

We did not work on optimizing the N-gram analysis and selection,
but we found that the speed of the system is reasonable—even in its current
form, considering that the algorithm is applied only to incorrect words on
the user’s request. Table [(see: table:speed-eval)](#table:speed-eval) summarizes the average
speed of performing the experiments in Table [(see: table:real-eval)](#table:real-eval).


**Table:**
(Caption: The speed of ranking the errors.
    <a id="table:speed-eval">(¶ table:speed-eval)</a>)
  <div style='text-align: center'>


| ---- | ---- | ---- |
| Material   |  English  |   Finnish |
| Algorithm  |           |           |
Unigram (baseline)
|  |  10.0 s     |  51.8 s  |
|  |  399.1 wps  |  6.2 wps |
POS N-grams 
|  |    377.4 s  |  1616.2 s |
|  |  10.6  wps  |  0.14 wps |

  </div>
<!-- end table -->

The performance penalty that is incurred on Finnish spell-checking but not so
much on English comes from the method of determining readings for words unknown
to the language model, i.e. from the guessing algorithm. The amount of words
unknown to the language model in Finnish was greater than for English due to
the training data sparseness and the morphological complexity of the language.

## Future Work and Discussion
<a id="sec:future-work">(¶ sec:future-work)</a>

In this work we recreated the results of basic and context-based spelling
correction for English and implemented same system for Finnish.  We have shown
that the POS based N-gram models are suitable for improving the spelling
corrections for both morphologically more complex languages such as Finnish and
for further improving languages with simpler morphologies like English. To
further verify the claim, the method may still need to be tested on a
typologically wider spectrum of languages.

In this article, we used readily available and hand-made error corpora to test
our error correction method. A similar method as the one we use for error
correction should be possible in error detection as well, especially when
detecting real-word errors [(cites: mays/1991)](#mays/1991). In future research, an obvious
development is to integrate the N-gram system as a part of a real spell-checker
system for both detection and correction of spelling errors, as is already done
for the unigram based spell checker demonstrated in [(cites: pirinen/2010/lrec)](#pirinen/2010/lrec).

The article discussed only the reranking over basic edit distance error
models, further research should include more careful statistical training for
the error model as well, such as one demonstrated in [(cites: brill/2000)](#brill/2000). 

## Conclusion

In this paper we have demonstrated the use of finite-state methods for trigram
based generation of spelling suggestions. We have shown that the basic
word-form trigram methods suggested for languages like English do not seem to
be as useful without modification for morphologically more complex languages
like Finnish.  Instead a more elaborate N-gram scheme using  POS n-grams is
successful for Finnish as well as English.

## Acknowledgements

We are grateful to Sam Hardwick for making the spell checking software
available and the HFST research group for fruitful discussions. We also thank
the anonymous reviewers for useful suggestions and pointers.

<!-- bib style: splncs03 -->
# References

* <a id="damerau/1964">**damerau/1964**</a>:
    * author: F J Damerau
    * title: A technique for computer detection and correction of spellin...
    * journal: Commun. ACM
    * year: 1964
    * number: 7
* <a id="pirinen/2010/lrec">**pirinen/2010/lrec**</a>:
    * author: Tommi A Pirinen and Krister Lind
’{e}n
    * title: Finite-State Spell-Checking with Weighted Language and Error...
    * booktitle: Proceedings of the Seventh SaLTMiL workshop on creation and ...
    * year: 2010
    * address: Valletta, Malta
    * pages: 13–18
    * url: http://siuc01.si.ehu.es/
%7Ejipsagak/SALTMIL2010_Proceeding...
* <a id="mitton/2009">**mitton/2009**</a>:
    * author: Mitton, Roger
    * title: Ordering the suggestions of a spellchecker without using con...
    * journal: Nat. Lang. Eng.
    * volume: 15
    * number: 2
    * year: 2009
    * issn: 1351-3249
    * pages: 173–192
    * doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S1351324908004804
    * publisher: Cambridge University Press
    * address: New York, NY, USA
* <a id="levenshtein/1966">**levenshtein/1966**</a>:
    * author: V. I. Levenshtein
    * title: Binary codes capable of correcting deletions, insertions, an...
    * journal: Soviet Physics—Doklady 10, 707–710. Translated from Doklad...
    * year: 1966
    * pages: 845–848
* <a id="kukich/1992">**kukich/1992**</a>:
    * author: Kukich, Karen
    * title: Techniques for automatically correcting words in text
    * journal: ACM Comput. Surv.
    * volume: 24
    * number: 4
    * year: 1992
    * issn: 0360-0300
    * pages: 377–439
    * doi: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/146370.146380
    * publisher: ACM
    * address: New York, NY, USA
* <a id="church/1991">**church/1991**</a>:
    * author: K. Church and W. Gale
    * title: Probability Scoring for Spelling Correction
    * journal: Statistics and Computing
    * pages: 93–103
    * year: 1991
* <a id="mays/1991">**mays/1991**</a>:
    * author: Mays, Eric and Damerau, Fred J. and Mercer, Robert L.
    * title: Context based spelling correction
    * journal: Inf. Process. Manage.
    * volume: 27
    * number: 5
    * year: 1991
    * issn: 0306-4573
    * pages: 517–522
    * doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0306-4573(91)90066-U
    * publisher: Pergamon Press, Inc.
    * address: Tarrytown, NY, USA
* <a id="silfverberg/2011">**silfverberg/2011**</a>:
    * error: <strong style="color: red">missing from bibs</strong>
* <a id="otero/2007">**otero/2007**</a>:
    * added-at: 2008-10-19T00:00:00.000+0200
    * author: Otero, Juan and Graña, J. and Vilares, Manuel
    * biburl: http://www.bibsonomy.org/bibtex/2e9476d9845056d646f4940eb909...
    * booktitle: EUROCAST
    * date: 2008-10-19
    * description: dblp
    * editor: Moreno-Díaz, Roberto and Pichler, Franz and Quesada-Arencibi...
    * ee: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-75867-9_37
    * interhash: a2c2d0f4653005d398ed31487e1f495c
    * intrahash: e9476d9845056d646f4940eb9093e7b5
    * isbn: 978-3-540-75866-2
    * keywords: dblp
    * pages: 290-296
    * publisher: Springer
    * series: Lecture Notes in Computer Science
    * timestamp: 2008-10-19T00:00:00.000+0200
    * title: Contextual Spelling Correction.
    * url: http://dblp.uni-trier.de/db/conf/eurocast/eurocast2007.html#...
    * volume: 4739,
    * year: 2007
* <a id="agata/2002">**agata/2002**</a>:
    * author: Savary, Agata
    * title: Typographical Nearest-Neighbor Search in a Finite-State Lexi...
    * booktitle: CIAA ’01: Revised Papers from the 6th International Conferen...
    * year: 2002
    * isbn: 3-540-00400-9
    * pages: 251–260
    * publisher: Springer-Verlag
    * address: London, UK
* <a id="mohri/2002">**mohri/2002**</a>:
    * author: Mehryar Mohri and Michael Riley
    * title: An efficient algorithm for the n-best-strings problem
    * year: 2002
* <a id="norvig/2010">**norvig/2010**</a>:
    * author: Peter Norvig
    * title: How To Write a Spelling Corrector
    * howpublished: Web Page, Visited February 28th 2010, Available 
url{http:/...
    * year: 2010
    * url: http://norvig.com/spell-correct.html
* <a id="pirinen/2011/nodalida">**pirinen/2011/nodalida**</a>:
    * title: Modularisation of Finnish Finite-State Language Description-...
    * author: Tommi A Pirinen
    * year: 2011
    * booktitle: Nodalida 2011
    * pages: 299—302
    * crossref: conf/nodalida/2011
    * url: http://www.helsinki.fi/
%7Etapirine/publications/Pirinen-no...
* <a id="visk">**visk**</a>:
    * author: Auli Hakulinen and Maria Vilkuna and Riitta Korhonen and Ves...
    * year: 2008
    * title: Iso suomen kielioppi
    * publisher: Suomalaisen Kirjallisuuden Seura
    * note: referred on 31.12.2008, available from 
url{http://kaino.ko...
* <a id="brill/2000">**brill/2000**</a>:
    * author: Brill, Eric and Moore, Robert C.
    * title: An improved error model for noisy channel spelling correctio...
    * booktitle: ACL ’00: Proceedings of the 38th Annual Meeting on Associati...
    * year: 2000
    * pages: 286–293
    * location: Hong Kong
    * doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.3115/1075218.1075255
    * publisher: Association for Computational Linguistics
    * address: Morristown, NJ, USA



<!-- end document -->

* * *

<span style='font-size: 8pt'>Converted with [Flammie’s latex2markdown](https://github.com/flammie/latex2markdown) v.0.1.0</span>

